# What is Docker?

Setting up and configuring a computing environment is difficult and often overlooked or implicit. Docker makes it much easier to document and share computing environments. The properties of docker might have implications for the preservation and stewardship of digital scholarship.

Docker is kind of difficult to understand both if you have loads of experience managing Linux computers or if you are just getting started with [the command line](http://www.cryptonomicon.com/beginning.html). While I had many years of UNIX and Linux system administration, it took me a bit of time to unravel and reconfigure my understanding in light of the new paradigm of managing servers that Docker affords. Basically, I had to unlearn and relearn things, which means people starting from the beginning might have a bit of an advantage because they coming to understand this new way managing and administering things without as much baggage. This is not to say you won't have a long and difficult climb, it just means you won't have as heavy of a load to bare.

Docker is best understood to be a suite of technologies that have been designed to make the process of developing, deploying, and maintaining _applications . Notice how I said application_ instead of _server?_ This is a subtle but significant shift in emphasis because it signals the paradigm shift that as occurred nd the difficulty I initially had trying to wrap my head around Docker. Docker shifts focus away from managing and maintaining servers to the management and maintenance of applictions. This shift is kind of like what Ford says when they talk about [transitioning from a car company to a "mobility" company](http://www.wsj.com/articles/ford-says-it-will-focus-more-on-transportation-services-sector-1452016172), they are still doing the same basic thing, but instead of building a car to sell you, they are managing a rideshare of self-driving cars \(that you pay to get you from point A to point B\). Perhaps, this analogy is a bit awkward...it is 10:30pm on a Friday night. The general point of this paragraph is to convey the idea that Docker flips the emphasis from server to service. With Docker you are going to be the manager and operator of a service \(or collection of services\).

So, I still haven't even started to answer the question, "what is Docker." When I'm trying to explain it, I often start with "it is kind of like a Virtual Machine." Docker is kind of like a Virtual Machine, it lets you run an isolated computing environment inside of another computing environment. This isolated environment has its own operating system, file system, and networking. However, I need to emphasis the "kind of like" aspect of my original statement. Docker does in some superficial ways resemble a virtual machine, however, under the hood it looks very different.

Docker uses a particular technology called _containerization _to isolate environments. Containerization is different from virtualization, in a bunch of ways that I cannot fully explain \(because I don't fully understand them\), but in practice because it is much more\_lightweight.\_Docker is\_fast.\_Unlike virtualization, it doesn't have to "boot up" the isolated environment; it runs almost as fast as if you weren't running a thing inside a container \(there is some performance penalty, but that is getting into the nitty-gritty\). Docker, and more broadly Linux containers, are able to be super fast because they share a lot of resources with the host operating system that is running Docker. This does has some important drawbacks and limitations compared to virtualization. Unlike a virtualization solution like VMWare or VirtualBox, you can't really run docker on non-Linux machines AND you can't really run non-Linux operating systems inside the container. \(Note, you can actually run Docker on Windows and Mac desktop operating systems because of reasons I'll explain later...and magic\). Virtual machines don't borrow a lot of resources from the host operating system, so they are slower and heavier, but also more flexible. There are still many reasons to why people use virtual machines, but this document isn't about all that...it is about why YOU–a digital humanist–might want to check out Docker.

